docs/design.md, before:

# mcpGraph Design Document

## Overview

This document memorializes the high-level design and tooling recommendations for mcpGraph, a product similar to n8n that surfaces an MCP interface and internally implements a directed graph of MCP server calls. The system enables filtering and reformatting data between nodes, makes routing decisions based on node output, and maintains a declarative, observable configuration without embedding a full programming language.

## Core Architecture: The Orchestrator

### Recommended Platform: TypeScript (Node.js)

**Rationale:**
- The MCP SDK is most mature in TypeScript
- Frontend tools for visual graph editing (like React Flow) are industry standard
- Strong ecosystem for both backend orchestration and frontend visualization

### Graph Execution Engine

The system implements a custom graph execution engine that orchestrates the directed graph of MCP server calls.

**Design Approach:**
- **Custom Execution Loop**: A lightweight, sequential execution loop that provides full control over execution flow
- **Simple Architecture**: Direct mapping from YAML node definitions to execution, avoiding abstraction layers
- **Data Flow**: Execution context maintains state and data flow between nodes
- **Control Flow**: Supports conditional routing via switch nodes; cycles are supported for future loop constructs
- **Observability**: Built-in execution history tracking for debugging and introspection

**Implementation:**
The YAML configuration is parsed into a graph structure (`Graph` class) and executed by a custom `GraphExecutor` that:
- Starts at the tool's entry node
- Executes nodes sequentially based on the graph structure
- Tracks execution state and history
- Routes conditionally via switch nodes
- Continues until the exit node is reached

### MCP Integration

- Use `@modelcontextprotocol/sdk`
- The system exposes an MCP server interface
- The YAML configuration defines the MCP server metadata and the tools it exposes
- Each tool definition includes standard MCP tool metadata (name, description, input/output parameters)
- Each tool's graph has an explicit entry node that receives tool arguments and initializes execution
- Each tool's graph has an explicit exit node that returns the final result to the MCP tool caller
- Execution flows through the graph from entry node to exit node

## Declarative Logic & Data Transformation

To avoid embedding a full programming language while maintaining declarative, observable configurations, the system uses standardized expression engines.

### Data Reformatting: JSONata

**Why JSONata:**
- Declarative query and transformation language for JSON
- Single string expression enables clear observability
- Can log input, expression, and output to debug transformations

**Resources:** [JSONata Documentation](https://jsonata.org/)

**YAML Example:**
```yaml
transform:
  expr: "$merge([payload, {'timestamp': $now()}])"
```

### Routing Decisions: JSON Logic

**Why JSON Logic:**
- Allows complex rules (e.g., "if price > 100 and status == 'active'") as pure JSON objects
- Declarative and observable
- No embedded code execution
- **Note:** `var` operations in JSON Logic rules are evaluated using JSONata, allowing full JSONata expression support (including `$previousNode()` function)

**Resources:** [JSON Logic Documentation](https://jsonlogic.com/)

**YAML Example:**
```yaml
condition:
  and:
    - ">": [{ var: "entry.price" }, 100]
    - "==": [{ var: "entry.status" }, "active"]
```

**Advanced Example with JSONata:**
```yaml
condition:
  ">": [{ var: "$previousNode().count" }, 10]
```

## High-Level Design: The Graph Runner

The system exposes an MCP server that reads a YAML configuration file. When a tool is called on this MCP server, it executes the corresponding graph starting at the tool's entry node and continuing until the exit node is reached.

### The Workflow Lifecycle

1. **Parse**: Read the YAML configuration into a structure containing MCP server metadata, tool definitions, and the directed graph of nodes
2. **Initialize MCP Server**: Expose the MCP server with the tools defined in the configuration
3. **Tool Invocation**: When a tool is called:
   - Receive tool arguments from the MCP client
   - Start graph execution at the tool's entry node
   - Entry node receives tool arguments and initializes the execution context
4. **Execute Node**:
   - **Entry Node**: Receives tool arguments, initializes execution context, passes to next node
   - **Pre-transform**: Apply JSONata to the incoming data to format the tool arguments (if node is an MCP tool call)
   - **Call Tool**: Use the MCP SDK to `callTool` on the target server (if node is an MCP tool call)
   - **Transform**: Apply JSONata expressions to transform data (if node is a transform node)
   - **Route**: Evaluate JSON Logic against the current data state to decide which edge to follow next (if node is a switch/conditional)
   - **Track History**: Record node execution with inputs and outputs for observability
5. **Exit Node**: When execution reaches the exit node, extract the final result and return it to the MCP tool caller

## Visual Tooling & Observability

### Component Recommendations

| Component | Tooling Recommendation |
|-----------|----------------------|
| **Visual Editor** | **React Flow** - Industry standard for node-based UIs, used by companies like Stripe and Typeform. Provides customizable nodes, edges, zooming, panning, and built-in components like MiniMap and Controls. [React Flow Documentation](https://reactflow.dev/) |
| **Observability** | OpenTelemetry - wrap each node execution in a "Span" to see the "Trace" of data through the graph in tools like Jaeger |

## Implementation Strategy: The YAML Standard

Graph definitions should feel like Kubernetes manifests or GitHub Actions - declarative and version-controlled.

### Configuration Structure

The YAML configuration centers around MCP server and tool definitions:

1. **MCP Server Metadata**: Defines the MCP server information (name, version, description)
2. **Tools**: Array of tool definitions, each containing:
   - Standard MCP tool metadata (name, description)
   - Input parameters schema (MCP tool parameter definitions)
   - Output schema (what the tool returns)
   - Note: Entry and exit nodes are defined in the nodes section with a `tool` field indicating which tool they belong to
3. **Nodes**: The directed graph of nodes that execute when tools are called. Node types include:
   - **`entry`**: Entry point for a tool's graph execution. Receives tool arguments and initializes execution context.
     - **Output**: The tool input arguments (passed through as-is)
   - **`mcp`**: Calls an MCP tool on an internal or external MCP server using `callTool`
     - **Output**: The MCP tool's response (parsed from the tool's content)
   - **`transform`**: Applies JSONata expressions to transform data between nodes
     - **Output**: The result of evaluating the JSONata expression
   - **`switch`**: Uses JSON Logic to conditionally route to different nodes based on data
     - **Output**: The node ID of the target node that was routed to (string)
   - **`exit`**: Exit point for a tool's graph execution. Extracts and returns the final result to the MCP tool caller
     - **Output**: The output from the previous node in the execution history

### Example YAML Structure: count_files Tool

This example defines a `count_files` tool that takes a directory, lists its contents using the filesystem MCP server, counts the files, and returns the count:

```yaml
version: "1.0"

# MCP Server Metadata
server:
  name: "fileUtils"
  version: "1.0.0"
  description: "File utilities"

# Tool Definitions
tools:
  - name: "count_files"
    description: "Counts the number of files in a directory"
    inputSchema:
      type: "object"
      properties:
        directory:
          type: "string"
          description: "The directory path to count files in"
      required:
        - directory
    outputSchema:
      type: "object"
      properties:
        count:
          type: "number"
          description: "The number of files in the directory"

# MCP Servers used by the graph
servers:
  filesystem:
    command: "npx"
    args:
      - "-y"
      - "@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem"
      - "./tests/files"

# Graph Nodes
nodes:
  # Entry node: Receives tool arguments
  - id: "entry_count_files"
    type: "entry"
    tool: "count_files"
    next: "list_directory_node"
  
  # List directory contents
  - id: "list_directory_node"
    type: "mcp"
    server: "filesystem"
    tool: "list_directory"
    args:
      path: "$.entry_count_files.directory"
    next: "count_files_node"
  
  # Transform and count files
  - id: "count_files_node"
    type: "transform"
    transform:
      expr: |
        { "count": $count($split($.list_directory_node, "\n")) }
    next: "exit_count_files"
  
  # Exit node: Returns the count
  - id: "exit_count_files"
    type: "exit"
    tool: "count_files"
```

## Key Design Principles

1. **Declarative Configuration**: All logic expressed in YAML using standard expression languages (JSONata, JSON Logic)
2. **Observability**: Every transformation and decision is traceable and loggable
3. **No Embedded Code**: Avoid full programming languages to maintain clarity and safety
4. **Standard-Based**: Favor existing standards (JSONata, JSON Logic) over custom solutions
5. **Visual First**: Graph should be viewable and editable through a visual interface
6. **Execution Transparency**: Ability to observe graph execution in real-time

## System Components

1. **Executable**: Exposes an MCP server to run the graph (`mcpgraph` CLI)
2. **Programmatic API**: Exports `McpGraphApi` class for programmatic use (e.g., by visualizer applications)
3. **Graph Executor**: Core orchestration engine that executes the directed graph sequentially
4. **Execution Context**: Tracks execution state, data flow, and history
5. **Visual Editor**: Tools to visually view and edit the graph (future)
6. **Execution Observer**: Ability to observe and debug graph execution (future - see `docs/future-introspection-debugging.md`)

Commit message:

Update version to 0.1.17 and introduce execution limits in configuration to prevent infinite loops. Enhanced documentation to include details on execution limits and updated context structure for improved debugging capabilities.

docs/design.md, after:

# mcpGraph Design Document

## Overview

This document memorializes the high-level design and tooling recommendations for mcpGraph, a product similar to n8n that surfaces an MCP interface and internally implements a directed graph of MCP server calls. The system enables filtering and reformatting data between nodes, makes routing decisions based on node output, and maintains a declarative, observable configuration without embedding a full programming language.

## Core Architecture: The Orchestrator

### Recommended Platform: TypeScript (Node.js)

**Rationale:**
- The MCP SDK is most mature in TypeScript
- Frontend tools for visual graph editing (like React Flow) are industry standard
- Strong ecosystem for both backend orchestration and frontend visualization

### Graph Execution Engine

The system implements a custom graph execution engine that orchestrates the directed graph of MCP server calls.

**Design Approach:**
- **Custom Execution Loop**: A lightweight, sequential execution loop that provides full control over execution flow
- **Simple Architecture**: Direct mapping from YAML node definitions to execution, avoiding abstraction layers
- **Data Flow**: Execution context maintains state and data flow between nodes
- **Control Flow**: Supports conditional routing via switch nodes; cycles are supported for future loop constructs
- **Observability**: Built-in execution history tracking for debugging and introspection

**Implementation:**
The YAML configuration is parsed into a graph structure (`Graph` class) and executed by a custom `GraphExecutor` that:
- Starts at the tool's entry node
- Executes nodes sequentially based on the graph structure
- Tracks execution state and history
- Routes conditionally via switch nodes
- Continues until the exit node is reached

### MCP Integration

- Use `@modelcontextprotocol/sdk`
- The system exposes an MCP server interface
- The YAML configuration defines the MCP server metadata and the tools it exposes
- Each tool definition includes standard MCP tool metadata (name, description, input/output parameters)
- Each tool's graph has an explicit entry node that receives tool arguments and initializes execution
- Each tool's graph has an explicit exit node that returns the final result to the MCP tool caller
- Execution flows through the graph from entry node to exit node

## Declarative Logic & Data Transformation

To avoid embedding a full programming language while maintaining declarative, observable configurations, the system uses standardized expression engines.

### Data Reformatting: JSONata

**Why JSONata:**
- Declarative query and transformation language for JSON
- Single string expression enables clear observability
- Can log input, expression, and output to debug transformations

**Resources:** [JSONata Documentation](https://jsonata.org/)

**YAML Example:**
```yaml
transform:
  expr: "$merge([payload, {'timestamp': $now()}])"
```

### Routing Decisions: JSON Logic

**Why JSON Logic:**
- Allows complex rules (e.g., "if price > 100 and status == 'active'") as pure JSON objects
- Declarative and observable
- No embedded code execution
- **Note:** `var` operations in JSON Logic rules are evaluated using JSONata, allowing full JSONata expression support (including `$previousNode()` function)

**Resources:** [JSON Logic Documentation](https://jsonlogic.com/)

**YAML Example:**
```yaml
condition:
  and:
    - ">": [{ var: "entry.price" }, 100]
    - "==": [{ var: "entry.status" }, "active"]
```

**Advanced Example with JSONata:**
```yaml
condition:
  ">": [{ var: "$previousNode().count" }, 10]
```

## High-Level Design: The Graph Runner

The system exposes an MCP server that reads a YAML configuration file. When a tool is called on this MCP server, it executes the corresponding graph starting at the tool's entry node and continuing until the exit node is reached.

### The Workflow Lifecycle

1. **Parse**: Read the YAML configuration into a structure containing MCP server metadata, tool definitions, and the directed graph of nodes
2. **Initialize MCP Server**: Expose the MCP server with the tools defined in the configuration
3. **Tool Invocation**: When a tool is called:
   - Receive tool arguments from the MCP client
   - Start graph execution at the tool's entry node
   - Entry node receives tool arguments and initializes the execution context
4. **Execute Node**:
   - **Entry Node**: Receives tool arguments, initializes execution context, passes to next node
   - **Pre-transform**: Apply JSONata to the incoming data to format the tool arguments (if node is an MCP tool call)
   - **Call Tool**: Use the MCP SDK to `callTool` on the target server (if node is an MCP tool call)
   - **Transform**: Apply JSONata expressions to transform data (if node is a transform node)
   - **Route**: Evaluate JSON Logic against the current data state to decide which edge to follow next (if node is a switch/conditional)
   - **Track History**: Record node execution with inputs and outputs for observability
5. **Exit Node**: When execution reaches the exit node, extract the final result and return it to the MCP tool caller

## Visual Tooling & Observability

### Component Recommendations

| Component | Tooling Recommendation |
|-----------|----------------------|
| **Visual Editor** | **React Flow** - Industry standard for node-based UIs, used by companies like Stripe and Typeform. Provides customizable nodes, edges, zooming, panning, and built-in components like MiniMap and Controls. [React Flow Documentation](https://reactflow.dev/) |
| **Observability** | OpenTelemetry - wrap each node execution in a "Span" to see the "Trace" of data through the graph in tools like Jaeger |

## Implementation Strategy: The YAML Standard

Graph definitions should feel like Kubernetes manifests or GitHub Actions - declarative and version-controlled.

### Configuration Structure

The YAML configuration centers around MCP server and tool definitions:

1. **MCP Server Metadata**: Defines the MCP server information (name, version, description)
2. **Execution Limits** (optional): Guardrails to prevent infinite loops in cyclical graphs:
   - **`maxNodeExecutions`** (optional): Maximum total node executions across the entire graph. Default: `1000`. If execution reaches this limit, an error is thrown.
   - **`maxExecutionTimeMs`** (optional): Maximum wall-clock time for graph execution in milliseconds. Default: `300000` (5 minutes). If execution exceeds this time, an error is thrown.
   - Both limits are checked before each node execution. If either limit is exceeded, execution stops immediately with a clear error message.
3. **Tools**: Array of tool definitions, each containing:
   - Standard MCP tool metadata (name, description)
   - Input parameters schema (MCP tool parameter definitions)
   - Output schema (what the tool returns)
   - Note: Entry and exit nodes are defined in the nodes section with a `tool` field indicating which tool they belong to
4. **Nodes**: The directed graph of nodes that execute when tools are called. Node types include:
   - **`entry`**: Entry point for a tool's graph execution. Receives tool arguments and initializes execution context.
     - **Output**: The tool input arguments (passed through as-is)
   - **`mcp`**: Calls an MCP tool on an internal or external MCP server using `callTool`
     - **Output**: The MCP tool's response (parsed from the tool's content)
   - **`transform`**: Applies JSONata expressions to transform data between nodes
     - **Output**: The result of evaluating the JSONata expression
   - **`switch`**: Uses JSON Logic to conditionally route to different nodes based on data
     - **Output**: The node ID of the target node that was routed to (string)
   - **`exit`**: Exit point for a tool's graph execution. Extracts and returns the final result to the MCP tool caller
     - **Output**: The output from the previous node in the execution history

### Example YAML Structure: count_files Tool

This example defines a `count_files` tool that takes a directory, lists its contents using the filesystem MCP server, counts the files, and returns the count:

```yaml
version: "1.0"

# MCP Server Metadata
server:
  name: "fileUtils"
  version: "1.0.0"
  description: "File utilities"

# Optional: Execution limits to prevent infinite loops
executionLimits:
  maxNodeExecutions: 1000      # Maximum total node executions (default: 1000)
  maxExecutionTimeMs: 300000   # Maximum execution time in milliseconds (default: 300000 = 5 minutes)

# Tool Definitions
tools:
  - name: "count_files"
    description: "Counts the number of files in a directory"
    inputSchema:
      type: "object"
      properties:
        directory:
          type: "string"
          description: "The directory path to count files in"
      required:
        - directory
    outputSchema:
      type: "object"
      properties:
        count:
          type: "number"
          description: "The number of files in the directory"

# MCP Servers used by the graph
servers:
  filesystem:
    command: "npx"
    args:
      - "-y"
      - "@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem"
      - "./tests/files"

# Graph Nodes
nodes:
  # Entry node: Receives tool arguments
  - id: "entry_count_files"
    type: "entry"
    tool: "count_files"
    next: "list_directory_node"
  
  # List directory contents
  - id: "list_directory_node"
    type: "mcp"
    server: "filesystem"
    tool: "list_directory"
    args:
      path: "$.entry_count_files.directory"
    next: "count_files_node"
  
  # Transform and count files
  - id: "count_files_node"
    type: "transform"
    transform:
      expr: |
        { "count": $count($split($.list_directory_node, "\n")) }
    next: "exit_count_files"
  
  # Exit node: Returns the count
  - id: "exit_count_files"
    type: "exit"
    tool: "count_files"
```

## Key Design Principles

1. **Declarative Configuration**: All logic expressed in YAML using standard expression languages (JSONata, JSON Logic)
2. **Observability**: Every transformation and decision is traceable and loggable
3. **No Embedded Code**: Avoid full programming languages to maintain clarity and safety
4. **Standard-Based**: Favor existing standards (JSONata, JSON Logic) over custom solutions
5. **Visual First**: Graph should be viewable and editable through a visual interface
6. **Execution Transparency**: Ability to observe graph execution in real-time

## System Components

1. **Executable**: Exposes an MCP server to run the graph (`mcpgraph` CLI)
2. **Programmatic API**: Exports `McpGraphApi` class for programmatic use (e.g., by visualizer applications)
3. **Graph Executor**: Core orchestration engine that executes the directed graph sequentially
4. **Execution Context**: Tracks execution state, data flow, and history
   - **Execution History**: Single source of truth - ordered array of all node executions with unique `executionIndex`
   - **Context Building**: Context for expressions is built from history (most recent execution of each node wins)
   - **Flat Structure**: Simple `{ "node_id": output }` structure - backward compatible with `$.node_id` notation
   - **Loop Handling**: When nodes execute multiple times, context shows latest; history functions provide access to all executions
   - **Time-Travel Debugging**: Can reconstruct context at any point in execution history
5. **Visual Editor**: Tools to visually view and edit the graph (future)
6. **Execution Observer**: Ability to observe and debug graph execution (future - see `docs/future-introspection-debugging.md`)
